---
layout: post
title:  "gitolite access control"
author: jkedra
language: en
categories: tools
tags: git
jquery: true
comments: true
jss: [wikipize]
---

[Gitolite](http://gitolite.com) today wasted an hour of my time
which I had to spend figuring out how its access control system
really works in detail.

## Permissions

In its principles it is enough to work with just a couple of
[basic permissions](http://gitolite.com/gitolite/conf.html#the-permission-field)
like R (read), [RW](http://gitolite.com/gitolite/conf.html#write-types)
(R + create/fastforward/push a ref) and RW+ (RW + rewind/delete a ref).
The - (minus sign) removes an access.

There are some other other permissions like D/C/M which I was not
interested in yet.

## Gitolite Access Check Flow

A simple rule is, the config file is parsed from top to bottom. 
But there is one more thing - there are
[two different flows](http://gitolite.com/gitolite/conf.html#appendix-2-gitolite-access-check-flow).
One for read only operations (R - fetch, clone - flow #1) and another for doing
changes (RW+, flow #2). Normally the read access does not respect deny rules.
There is an option to change that but by default read only access discards all
- (deny) rules. Here is [an example][access-control] how it works.

{% highlight text linenos=table %}

repo testing
    RW+         = jxa
    -    master = aga
    RW+ dev/    = aga
    RW          = aga

{% endhighlight %}

In the example above user `jxa` has all access to all branches, including
delete/rewind. User `aga` has all possible privileges to do anything with
branches starting with `dev/`, for branches not starting with `dev/`, `aga` may
create and fast forward, but not rewind nor delete. For the `master` read
access (clone, pull) shall be granted (because of flow #1), but all other
privileges revoked.

However it did not work with my testing procedures.
See below how I test it.

## Testing

I found it comfortable to test directly at the server. Gitolite documentation
mentions [`gitolite access`](http://gitolite.com/gitolite/conf.html#tracing-the-access-control-decision) command. Here is its syntax:

{% highlight XML %}
   gitolite access [-q|-s] <repo> <user> <perm> <ref>
{% endhighlight %}

Instead of changing the `gitolite.conf` at remote git repository,
commiting and pushing it to the git server - I choose to edit the file
at the server, usually it is `$HOME/.gitolite/conf/gitolite.conf`.
It needs to be compiled after any change by `gitolite compile`.

## Unexpected Results

Then I spend some time to figure out why it works differently then
as described above and written in the documentation. Below we follow
a scenario where user `aga` requests fetch/clone access to `master`
branch.

{% highlight text %}

git@aws4:~/.gitolite/conf$ gitolite access -s testing aga R master
legend:
    d => skipped deny rule due to ref unknown or 'any',
    r => skipped due to refex not matching,
    p => skipped due to perm (W, +, etc) not matching,
    D => explicitly denied,
    A => explicitly allowed,
    F => denied due to fallthru (no rules matched)

  D        gitolite.conf:20         -    master = aga

R refs/heads/master testing aga DENIED by refs/heads/master
git@aws4:~/.gitolite/conf$ 

{% endhighlight %}

According to our rules, `aga` should be granted fetch/clone to `master`,
because flow #1 [ignores deny rules][access-control] and grants access
in line number 5. So gitolite does not behave as described.

Let's check another scenario, instead of naming a particular branch
we may use word `any` to test an access to unspecified brach.

{% highlight text %}

git@aws4:~/.gitolite/conf$ gitolite access -s testing aga R any
legend:
    d => skipped deny rule due to ref unknown or 'any',
    r => skipped due to refex not matching,
    p => skipped due to perm (W, +, etc) not matching,
    D => explicitly denied,
    A => explicitly allowed,
    F => denied due to fallthru (no rules matched)

  d        gitolite.conf:20         -    master = aga
  A        gitolite.conf:21         RW+ dev/    = aga

refs/heads/dev/
git@aws4:~/.gitolite/conf$ 

{% endhighlight %}

This time `access` tool explicitely skips the deny rule of line 20 and
grants access based on the line 21, because as I presume, `any` means
any branch, `dev` including. This kind of testing with `any` does not
look useful at first glance. But it is actually useful, just follow my
path and look what I have found:

{% highlight text %}
git@aws4:~/.gitolite/conf$ less ~/bin/commands/access
[...]

Notes:
    [...]
    The 'any' ref is special -- it ignores deny rules, thus simulating
    gitolite's behaviour during the pre-git access check (see 'deny-rules'
    section in rules.html for details).

{% endhighlight %}

Why did they hid it here? Indeed it matches flow #1 definition - it is supposed
to ignore all deny rules and all [refexes][refex].

## Wrap Up

So actually the `gitolite access` utility works as designed but we have to
test it twice: once for write access, and another one for read access
using `any` as the branch name.

Another motion - the documentation is usually poor,
check the source code by yourself.

## Documentation
1. [Branch Naming Best Practices](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/273695/git-branch-naming-best-practices) - StackOverFlow.
2. [Gitolite](https://github.com/sitaramc/gitolite/) - remote access and
   privilege system for git repositories, used by kernel.org.

# Git HowTo
* [How to Undo Almost Anything with GIT](https://github.com/blog/2019-how-to-undo-almost-anything-with-git)

[access-control]: http://gitolite.com/gitolite/conf.html#access-control-rule-matching
[refex]: http://gitolite.com/gitolite/conf.html#refex
