---
layout: post
title:  Moving BTRFS
author: jkedra
language: en
tags: linux fs
date: 2018-04-24
jquery: true
jss: [wikipize]
comments: true
---

# Scenario

In [my first BTRFS post][btrfs1] I described most of its basic features
and focused on creating and maintaining snapshots. After using BTRFS
for a time, a time came to replace existing 120GB SSD drive with a larger
one. My laptop has one M2 factor SSD disk and another 2'' hard drive.
The new M2 SSD is 250GB but I cannot have both SSD in the hardware
since there is only one M2 slot.

I made a few bad decisions before I came to a proper procedure:

#### 1<sup>st</sup>

Initially I thought the good enough way would be to release some space at hard
drive, create a partition there to hold a copy of the SSD disk.  Then add this
partition as another device as a mirror to the existing BTRFS volume. Then
split the mirror, remove the old 120GB SSD and leave the system booting from
the disk drive mirror. Then add 250G SSD, replacing the old 120GB one. It
sounded like a good plan. But don't do this at home kids. That is large risk
when you do it first time.  And for a while I thought I was left without any
system left.  Yes, of course, I did not take a backup.

Instead of failing a drive I converted the RAID1 to a single profile device
(differs from RAID0).  Luckily I was able to restore the system when I inserted
the original disk back to it. Don't go this way.

#### 2<sup>nd</sup>

This time at least I started with backup. I knew about `btrfs-send` and
`btrfs-received` but only a little. So I started making the backup
with `tar`. It always works but is not a great tool for a filesystem
dump like btrfs. Anyway, at least it is better than nothing.

Reading about moving data from one BTRFS to another I stumbled on these
send/receive commands to do the job. They seemed to me to binary copy BTRFS
snapshots pretty well. So I adjusted the 1<sup>st</sup> procedure to
include now the send/receive commands.

It did the trick actually. I copied data from the 120GB SSD to the hard
disk partition. Swaped 120/250GB SSD disks a few times before I decided
I am satisfied with the system on the hard drive and finally booted
without the original 120GB SSD. Then I repeated the whole procedure
again to move the daa from the hard drive to the larger SSD.

I forgot about a few things. I forgot to copy subvolumes I created
to exclude snapper snapshosts. This is why I had to reinsert the old SSD
and copy the missing stuff.

There was no 3<sup>rd</sup> scenario. Actually this one worked but was
not the best optimal one. The best optimal would be to copy all stuff
to an external usb drive using `btrfs-send`, replace the disks,
boot from an independent Linux on an usb drive, and using `btrfs-receive`
rebuild the system on the 250GB SSD. Next time maybe.

## Configuration

My laptop has a hard disk drive of 320GB and another M2 SSD which
is only 120GB in size. Benefits of SSD are so huge that actually I work
only with the SSD. The hard disk is currently used only to store
archive data and things I couldn't affort keeping on SSD.

SSD (sdb) and hard disk (sda) layouts are as below:

| name | size | description                 |
| ---- | ---: | ------------------------    |
| sdb1 | 4G   | `/boot`, bootable partition |
| sdb2 | 99G  | `/` + `/home`               |
| sdb3 | 8G   | swap                        |
| sda1 | 8G   | `/boot` copy from sdb1      |
| sda4 | 130G | new copy from sdb2          |

Now let's inspect subvolume configuration.

    btrfs subvolums list /
    ID 257 gen 292008 top level 5 path @
    ID 258 gen 292004 top level 5 path @home
    ID 274 gen 291494 top level 258 path @home/jxa/.virtualbox
    ID 275 gen 291511 top level 258 path @home/jxa/Downloads
    ID 276 gen 291511 top level 258 path @home/jxa/tmp
    ID 277 gen 291184 top level 258 path @home/jxa/VirtualBox VMs
    ID 312 gen 292007 top level 257 path var/log
    ID 358 gen 292005 top level 258 path @home/jxa/.cache
    ID 359 gen 291559 top level 258 path @home/jxa/Arch
    ID 437 gen 291998 top level 258 path @home/.snapshots
    ID 929 gen 291370 top level 437 path @home/.snapshots/279/snapshot
    ID 1761 gen 291551 top level 257 path .snapshot
    [...]

There are also multiple snapshots created by snapper which I don't care
for and some coming from docker. Those docker were apparently used
by some images I kept. Once the images were deleted, the corresponding
snapshots disappeared automatically.

## Safety Backup

The BTRFS send/receive commands work on readonly snaphots only.
So I had to create the snapshots first:

    btrfs subvolume snapshot -r / /root_ro 
    btrfs subvolume snapshot -r /home /home/home_ro

Now lets create a safety backup of these volumes.

    # btrfs send /root_ro | pv -terba | gzip > /media/jxa/backup/t530-btrfs-root.gz
    # btrfs send /home/home_ro | pv -terba | gzip > /media/jxa/backup/t530-btrfs-home.gz


## Restore to a New Disk

I am going to clone my system to the hard disk, the target partition
will be `/dev/sda4`. I start with creating btrfs filesystem and
mounting do `/mnt/backup`:

    # mkfs.btrfs -d single -L btrfs2 -f /dev/sda4
    # mount /dev/sda4 /mnt/backup
    # mount | grep btrfs
    /dev/sdb2 on / type btrfs (rw,realtime,space_cache,subvolid=257,subvol=/@)
    /dev/sdb2 on /home type btrfs (rw,realtime,space_cache,subvolid=258,subvol=/@home)
    /dev/sdb2 on /var/lib/docker/plugins type btrfs
                 (rw,realtime,space_cache,subvolid=257,subvol=/@/var/lib/docker/plugins)
    /dev/sda4 on /mnt/backup type btrfs (rw,realtime,space_cache,subvolid=5,subvol=/)

Docker mountpoint disappears once the docker service is stopped.  It does not
seem to be any other docker subvolume present once I have deleted all docker
images.

Now lets clone root and home subvolumes to target disk:

    # btrfs send /home/home_ro | pv -terba | btrfs receive /mnt/backup
    At subvol /home/home_ro
    At subvol home_ro
    26,3GiB 0:12:16 [36,6MiB/s] [36,6MiB/s] 
    # btrfs send /root_ro | pv -terba | btrfs receive /mnt/backup
    At subvol /root_ro
    At subvol root_ro
    12,4GiB 0:07:30 [28,2MiB/s] [28,2MiB/s]

`pv` is a tool to progress monitoring while copying data through a pipe.

Now rename newly created subvolumes to more convenient names.
It can be done simply through usual `mv` command:

    # cd /mnt/backup
    # mv home_ro @home
    # mv root_ro @

Subvolumes above were created as read-only snapshots. I am checking their
status and converting to read-write subvolumes:

    # btrfs property get -ts /mnt/backup/@
    ro=true
    # btrfs property get -ts /mnt/backup/@home
    ro=true
    # btrfs property set -ts /mnt/backup/@ ro false
    # btrfs property set -ts /mnt/backup/@home ro false


I also need to copy `/boot` from sdb1 to sda1 - so I just created
a new ext2 filesystem at sda1, then created a copy of `/boot`
(currently mounted from sdb1) to sdb1 using tar (or `cp -p`).

## Preparing the New System

At this poing I have the full copy of the system. The only missing
part is to configure the new `/etc/fstab` and reinstall [GRUB](we:).

    # cd /mnt
    # umount /mnt/backup
    # mkdir root
    # mount -t btrfs -o subvol=@ /dev/sda4 /mnt/root
    # mount /dev/sda1 /mnt/root/boot
    # for i in dev dev/pts sys proc run; do mount --bind /$i /mnt/root/$i; done
    # chroot /mnt/root

Now at /mnt/root I have the new system, time to edit `/etc/fstab` adjusting
device names to the new SSD disk. Once done, the only thing to do is to
reinstall GRUB with this commands:

    # update-grub
    # grub-install --recheck /dev/sda
    # exit

Umount, reboot and see if it works:

    # cd /
    # umount -R /mnt/root
    # reboot

#### Boot Issues

The partition table at the 250GB appeared to be GPT type which I 
did not discovered until all was copied and ready. GRUB cannot install
on the disk like that until it has a [dedicated BIOS Boot Partition][grub-gpt].
I addressed the problem by dropping the sdb1 partition and creating
two of them instead. One for the BIOS boot and another - reduced in size -
for the original purpose. Luckily it was the `/boot` so it was easily
reconstructed.

## Resources

1. [BTRFS wiki.kernel.org][wikikernel] - primary source of information on BTRFS.
2. [How to manage BTRFS Storage Pools, Subvolumes and Snapshots][course1] - RedHat documentation on LVM CLI.
3. [Incremental Backup][incrm]
4. [Subvolumes and Snapshots][lwn-sub1] - an LWN article.
5. [Snappper][snapper] - automatic snapshots.
6. [Tuning Snapper][archlin] - ArchLinux Wiki.
7. [ArchLinux on BTRFS][archbtrfs]
8. [BTRFS in Oracle Enterprise Liinux][oel6]
9. [BTRFS features][ora1], Oracle's summary.
10. [Fixing BTRFS full problems][fixing-full-problems]
11. [Moving BTRFS subvolume to another disk][mov-subv]
12. [Installing GRUB on GPT][grub-gpt]
13. [Przywracanie GRUB z chroot](https://dug.net.pl/tekst/77/przywracanie_grub2_za_pomoca_chroot/) (PL)
14. [Install GRUB from chroot](https://zeldor.biz/2010/12/install-grub-from-chroot/)
15. [Grub boot problems][grub-noboot]
16. [Ubuntu Community BTRFS][ubuntu-btrfs]


[btrfs1]: /2016/09/07/btrfs.html
[course1]: http://www.linux.com/learn/tutorials/767332-howto-manage-btrfs-storage-pools-subvolumes-and-snapshots-on-linux-part-1
[archbtrfs]: https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Btrfs#Copy-On-Write_.28CoW.29

[wikikernel]: https://btrfs.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page
[incrm]: https://btrfs.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Incremental_Backup
[lwn-sub1]: https://lwn.net/Articles/579009/
[snapper]: http://snapper.io/documentation.html
[archlin]: https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Snapper
[ubuntu14kernel]: http://askubuntu.com/questions/690149/when-will-4-2-0-kernel-be-available-for-14-04-lts
[cow1]: https://btrfs.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/SysadminGuide#Copy_on_Write_.28CoW.29
[oel6]: https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E37670_01/E37355/html/ol_btrfs.html
[ora1]: http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/server-storage/linux/technologies/btrfs-overview-1898045.html
[wiki-convert1]: https://btrfs.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Conversion_from_Ext3
[wiki-balancing]: https://btrfs.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/SysadminGuide#Balancing
[wiki-snapshots]: https://btrfs.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/SysadminGuide#Snapshots
[fixing-full-problems]: http://marc.merlins.org/perso/btrfs/post_2014-05-04_Fixing-Btrfs-Filesystem-Full-Problems.html
[mov-subv]: http://c0rp.kz/moving-root-btrfs-subvolume-to-another-disk/
[grub-gpt]: https://www.gnu.org/software/grub/manual/grub/html_node/BIOS-installation.html#BIOS-installation
[grub-noboot]: https://askubuntu.com/questions/493826/grub-rescue-problem-after-deleting-ubuntu-partition
[ubuntu-btrfs]: https://help.ubuntu.com/community/btrfs
