---
layout: post
title:  "Vim Beauty"
author: jkedra
language: en
categories: vim
tags: vim
---


## 7 Habits of Being Effective
When I saw first 10 minutes of [7 Habits For Effective Text Editing 2.0],
by Brian Moolenaar, I immediately realized it was the best way to
spent 10 minutes in the last month. It struck me I was not aware
of so basic features of vim!
Sure I know a lot about it, but I didn't know fundamental commands!

The rest of the talk was not as good so I recommend to see at least
the beginning of it. Maybe you will like the rest as well. 
But if you don't have time, here is what I found there:

### Search
Something we do the most often. This is why it is worth to get
more than familiar on this topic. Good start is to read vim's documentation
on the subject: `:help search-commands`.

The basic search skill is to be aware of `:set hlsearch` and be able to
use it with a star command `*`. The star and its derivatives (`#`,`g*`,...)
allow to find the word you have near the cursor.

### Code Completion
It works out of the box! Once you write a complex method name,
vim is aware of it and next time vim may help you with autocompleting it.
Just start typing a few letters of the workd you have written before,
then press <kbd>CTRL</kbd>-<kbd>N</kbd>
and vim does autocomplete - if you are lucky. If you are not - press the
shortcut a couple of times until you hit the proper name.

## Other hints
As many others when I am stuck I reach for [stackoverflow](stackoverflow.com)
to find answers. And I usually do. Below are my findings.

### Stats
Q: I want to see numbers of characters I have highlighted.
My VIM does not do it out of the box.

A: But [people say](http://superuser.com/questions/289264/count-highlighted-string-length-in-vim)
it already has such the capability and it is as simple as
highlighting a block with <kbd>v</kbd> and typing
<kbd>g</kbd> <kbd>CTRL</kbd>-<kbd>g</kbd>.
It works great.

### Multiple lines

Vim by default searches for a text which spans multiple lines.
`\s` matches a white characters (space, tab). Adding an underscore `_\s`
expands the match to include newline. The underscore adds a newline to any
character class.

I found interesting `/^abc` and `/abc$` match only at the beginning
and the end for a line correspondingly. But `^$` loose it special meaning
anywhere else. In the pattern `/abc^def$xwy` they are just ordinary characters.

However following patterns keep their special meaning anywhere:

`\_^` matches begin of the line (zero width)

`\_$` matches end of the line (zero width)

Zero width is little tricky with the above. For example:

* `/abcd\_$efgh` finds nothing because the search is looking for
  `abcdefgh` where `abcd` is also at the end of the line (cannot be).
* A working example is `/abcd\_$\_s*efgh` which finds `abcd`
  at the end-of-line followed by any whitespace or newlines then `efgh`.
* `/abcd\_s*\_^efgh` finds `abcd` followed by any whitespace or newlines
  then `efgh` which begins the line.

#### Complex Examples

* `/abc\n\*efgh` 


Replacing multiple lines by a few or a single one.

Read first an article on [searching across multiple lines][multiline].

{% highlight vim %}
{% raw %}
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

## References

1. `help regexp`
2. `help magic`
3. `help /multi`
4. [vim wikipedia]
5. [vim stackexchange]

[vim wikipedia]:      we:Vim_(text_editor)
[vim stackexchange]: https://vi.stackexchange.com/
[7 Habits For Effective Text Editing 2.0]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p6K4iIMlouI
[multiline]: https://vim.fandom.com/wiki/Search_across_multiple_lines

